osx/README.md, before:

# Traveling Ruby OS X build system

The build system requires the Developer Commandline Tools to be installed, as well as the OS X 10.8 SDK.

To build binary packages, run:

    cd osx
    rake

You can view all tasks by running `rake -T`.

## Installing the OS X 10.8 SDK

The OS X 10.8 SDK is included in Xcode 5. If you are using a newer version of Xcode then you can install it as follows.

### 1. Download Xcode 5.1.1

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/phusion/traveling-ruby/master/doc/download_xcode.jpg)

Go to the Apple Developer website and download Xcode 5.1.1.

### 2. Show Xcode package contents

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/phusion/traveling-ruby/master/doc/xcodepackage.jpg)

Open the Xcode .dmg file. Right click on Xcode.app and choose "Show Package Contents".

### 3. Locate OS X 10.8 SDK and copy it to the system

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/phusion/traveling-ruby/master/doc/sdk.jpg)

Locate the OS X 10.8 SDK inside the Xcode package contents. Copy this directory to /Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer/Platforms/MacOSX.platform/Developer/SDKs/.

Commit message:

Updated docs to install Xcode 5.1.1
- The Download page is hidden in the new Developer Portal and hard to find
- The screenshot was outdated and didn't apply any more
- Added direct download link

osx/README.md, after:

# Traveling Ruby OS X build system

The build system requires the Developer Commandline Tools to be installed, as well as the OS X 10.8 SDK.

To build binary packages, run:

    cd osx
    rake

You can view all tasks by running `rake -T`.

## Installing the OS X 10.8 SDK

You are required to use an older version of Xcode as you need to have the OS X 10.8 SDK installed locally. You can install Xcode 5.1.1 as follows.

### 1. Download Xcode 5.1.1

Open the [Developer Portal download page](https://developer.apple.com/downloads/) and login with your Apple account. When you see the list of downloads, just open the [xcode_5.1.1.dmg link](http://adcdownload.apple.com/Developer_Tools/xcode_5.1.1/xcode_5.1.1.dmg) in your browser.

### 2. Show Xcode package contents

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/phusion/traveling-ruby/master/doc/xcodepackage.jpg)

Open the Xcode .dmg file. Right click on Xcode.app and choose "Show Package Contents".

### 3. Locate OS X 10.8 SDK and copy it to the system

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/phusion/traveling-ruby/master/doc/sdk.jpg)

Locate the OS X 10.8 SDK inside the Xcode package contents. Copy this directory to /Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer/Platforms/MacOSX.platform/Developer/SDKs/.
